This video is brought to you by curiosity stream.
What's up guys,
Helen here to talk about something we collectively hate and yet continue to
glutinous Lee indulge in election season. You know,
that special time when everyone bombard you with digital ads, planning, emails,
annoying surveys, and inexplicably, real paper mail,
all to convince you to vote for their choice of fancy suited white tooth
candidate. Now elections are a necessity for any functioning democracy,
but nowhere in the constitution does it mandate that the media spend two full
calendar years pumping America's homes full of speculation about likeability,
electability, presidential Ines, and so very occasionally policy issues.
In fact,
it kind of makes us freaks on the world stage Canadians consider 11 weeks to be
a long election cycle while in France campaigning.
Can't last more than two weeks before the first round of voting,
which is to say the contemporary.
American presidential election Bonanza is not the norm for the world.
So how did we get here?
We'll explain in this wisecrack edition on American presidential elections,
what happened?
And if you liked our deep dive into the history of American elections,
then you should check out. Curiosity. Stream.
Curiosity stream is home to thousands of nonfiction,
documentary and movie titles about science nature,
food technology travel, and you guessed it history. There,
different series cover all areas of American history.
And last night I checked out JFK backed in fable.
It's a fascinating look at the mid-list behind JFK's iconic presidency and
examines. Why he remains such a powerful figure in American culture.
I can't wait to check out everything else they have to offer.
And if you want to see for yourself,
then you should click the link in the description. Now,
if you use the code wisecrack, you can get a whole year for just 1499.
That's less than $2 a month for thousands of hours worth of content,
you can stream it all right on your phone, laptop, smart TV,
and even your X-Box. So check it out today. That's
curiositystream.com/wisecrack and use the code wisecrack at checkout.
Thanks to curiosity stream for sponsoring this episode.
And now back to the show.
And now we got to talk about a major political heavyweight, you know,
president William Henry Harrison now. Okay. Okay.
He's not exactly the sexiest name in politics. If you know him at all,
it's because he kicked the bucket almost immediately after becoming president.
In 30.
Days.
But his short lived tenure in the white house was made possible by a pretty
radical decision. He campaigned that's it. That's the radical decision.
William Henry Harrison campaigned for the presidency. It sounds totally bananas.
But for the first 100 years of American history,
it was pretty taboo for a presidential candidate to publicly try to become
president. No, really, as Richard J.
Ellis and Mark Detrick explained for close to a hundred years,
the prevailing norm was that the presidency was not an office.
One should actively this precedent dated back to 1789.
When George Washington very reluctantly accepted the gig after a unanimous vote
by the young country's electors after years of war and presumably bad food,
all this tire general wanted was to chill at home.
Instead he humbly accepted the call of duty.
The men who angled to succeed him somewhat followed his example,
modestly accepting their party's nomination before disappearing from public view
until the results were in.
Of course the stuffy propriety was undoubtedly a performance.
If you were Thomas Jefferson, for instance,
you wouldn't campaign so much as casually sort of bribe someone to start a
newspaper purely for the purposes of roasting your opponents while publicly
campaigning for president. Wasn't cool.
It never stopped tons of candidates like Andrew Jackson or Abraham Lincoln from
still the lead controlling their campaigns behind the scenes,
but asking people to vote for you directly, that was just kind of tacky.
You weren't supposed to be too greedy for power. Explain scholar,
Michael Kasmin. Even the presidential embodiment of the Tasmanian devil.
Andrew Jackson was convinced by his advisors to let up on his letter writing
campaign and agreeably keep silent. When running for reelection,
don't get me wrong. There were still campaigns throughout the century.
Surrogates and supporters of candidates would do the dirty work of actually
rousing voters.
But as scholar Jeffrey Toolis puts it candidates exemplified a public teaching
that political campaigns were beneath the dignity of men suited for governance.
As land ownership requirements were abolished newly eligible voters that is
landless white dudes wanted to know who the hell they were voting for.
This created a tension where candidates wanted to be appropriately dignified
while also telling average Joes what they thought enter my man,
Harrison, who would knighted what scholar,
Kathleen Hall Jamison calls the presidency's first full-blown campaign in
1840 Harrison was a military man, but his record was a bit spotty.
When he first ran for president as a wig in 1836,
he orchestrated a tour through four States where he was met with horse-drawn
carriage, parades, bonfires, and singing.
It gave us sensibly apolitical speeches about the importance of the declaration
of independence and in offensive patriotic stuff, still dude lost,
but things were going to get real wild in 1840. That's when Harrison,
once again tried for the presidency this time,
at least pretending to be intent on maintaining the basic decorum.
Washington had shown by staying the hell home. After all,
he had explained where he stood on everything in 1836, right?
Tell that to the democratic newspapers who instantly responded by calling him
general mom,
a caged simpleton and an old granny for refusing to voice his stance on the
issues.
Other attacks decried him as a sort of Backwoods Yahoo who would be content to
live in a log cabin, drinking cider and collecting his pension.
What they didn't know was that Harrison's wig party would seize on this imagery,
making the log cabin hard cider and objectively dope coonskin hat.
The symbol of his campaign,
ironically Harrison was actually born into a wealthy family and lived in a
mansion anyway, intent on defending himself in his physical strength.
Harrison embarked on a tour around the country,
holding ruckus cider drenched rallies to prove how tough he was still.
He at least pretended to have some reservations in one speech,
Harrison confessed that this campaigning violated his sense of propriety and
that he feared he was establishing a dangerous precedent.
He told crowds that he wasn't there to campaign,
but this didn't stop him from decrying. His opponents,
basically the first real campaign was kind of just the result of one man's
refusal to, uh, look like he was sitting at home,
twiddling his thumbs in the process. Harrison,
who was maligned for being the then oldest candidate at 68 years of age,
rebranded himself as a 19th century, all American bro.
This is what Jamison calls,
the first example of image advertising in presidential campaigning, right?
And after some exhausting, mid 19th century travel Harrison,
one intent on looking strong at the inauguration ceremony.
He did not wear a hat or a coat despite the miserable weather because wearing a
coat is for sissies, I guess. Anyway,
he talked for two hours and got seriously sick though.
Most probably from drinking contaminated Washington DC water. Anyway,
he died just four weeks after which like bummer,
but Harrison's log cabin revolution.
Didn't change everything so fast for the next three elections publicly taking to
the stump that is traveling the nation,
giving the same speech over and over again.
It was actually considered a bad move.
The only candidate to repeat Harrison's ballsy antics was with general Winfield,
Scott fuel orange democratic disdain for encouraging man worship.
When he lost everyone. Extolled his victorious opponent, Franklin Pierce,
and his silence and blame Scott for being a blabber mouth.
This continued from 1860 to 1872 during which Democrats kept
stumping and kept losing. However, image advertising was still evolving.
You couldn't go anywhere without seeing a photograph of Abe Lincoln's face,
but the guy was nowhere to be found.
He didn't write letters or make speeches or participate in debates.
Those famous Lincoln Douglas debates were actually over a Senate seat,
which was a little more kosher. Anyway, the curse of the stump loomed large,
but at the same time, people wanted to hear their guy talk.
So late 19th century,
we saw kind of uneasy transition into that front porch speech or several
candidates like games, Garfield,
or Benjamin Harrison invited supporters over to watch them speak from their
house, which wasn't technically campaigning.
Cause you were just being a polite host. Okay?
Like how it isn't technically assaulted by swinging this bat wildly around.
And you just happened to me in front of me, which is to say it totally is.
And so slowly it becomes increasingly less taboo for the presidential candidate
to speak for themselves.
But this modest style of campaigning would get seriously undermined with one
William Jennings, Bryan, former democratic congressmen and renowned orator.
Brian never won the presidency,
but he'd go down in history for revolutionizing the modern campaign,
a pioneer of the whistle-stop tour,
which used the railway system to traverse a nation.
Brian embarked on four big trips,
giving some speeches at nearly every railway stop.
His regimen of 600 passionate speeches in three months reached by some
estimates, 5 million Americans. Meanwhile, his opponent, William McKinley,
stuck to the chiller front porch campaign while letting a sprawling network of
surrogates do most of the campaigning for him at the same time.
Brian encountered pushback from Republicans who criticized him for begging for
the presidency as a tramp might beg for a tie,
but Brian knew he was playing to his strengths as an incredibly effective order
known for rousing crowds to mania with lines like you shall not crucify mankind
on a cross of gold though. Brian lost.
He marked an important moment in campaign history.
When according to Ellison Dedrick,
the nominee was expected to be the primary spokesman and central figure of the
campaign. This is the world we exist in today, of course,
but what this change came, another development, the rise of the personality,
or more specifically the package personality for candidates and his speeches
would start moving from stump tours to your home via radio and television.
People began to care more and more about what their favorite candidate was like.
Are they a huge Weeb? Can I have a beer with them?
Do I get the vague sense that they Moonlight as a serial killer Franklin
Roosevelt,
like his uncle Teddy seemed to recognize this instinctively and his ability to
project warmth,
likeability and Supreme competence in newsreels and over the radio encouraged a
nation while an incumbent president campaigning for reelection was still
generally frowned upon FDR for the most part,
spun himself more diplomatically as a president of the whole people and got away
with it. Of course,
Roosevelt was consciously doing some major image advertising all our boy
Harrison, the guy who was savvy about the way he packaged his own brand,
always campaigning with his same cigarette holder, jaunty, top hat, Ponce, neck,
and smile. He effortlessly exuded a compelling personality, equal parts,
jokester and calming voice of reason.
Stricken with polio Roosevelt was determined to portray physical strength in the
media and developed all kinds of sneaky ways to hide his paralysis in his
political career.
He'd pull stunts to emphasize his strength like flying to the national
convention.
To accept his candidacy back when air travel was dangerous and embarking on
railroad tours,
where he was able to appear to be standing on his own while secretly being
supported by a steel bar.
Overall Roosevelt used campaigning to prove he was presidential both in its
assumed norms of health and this whole personality driven. I'm a man stick.
Of course we can see similar themes rippling into today.
When our current president works overtime to stress his vigor and health after
contracting a deadly virus, I feel much better now.
So in some ways the quest to prove yourself tough, healthy,
and manly has been something of a constant,
but a lot else has changed specifically the rhetoric of how
personality is conveyed.
If you want to understand how our personality driven elections have become a
nonstop it's of TV ads and dumb optics. We to talk about Dwight D Eisenhower,
the first TV candidate. No,
it's not that Eisenhower was just the first candidate to widely campaign on TV
it's that he handed over a big chunk of his strategy to admin.
It was 1951. And though he was the most popular man in America.
Eisenhower had no government experience outside the military and so sought to
convey legitimacy instead of counting on the lengthy speeches of your,
he hired ad men to produce several dozen short TV spots of him answering
advertiser pen questions for cited by average Americans with advertiser pinned
answers to say these were light on policy or any assumptions for that matter.
It is an understatement Eisenhower initially worried that these ads were
undignified, but was convinced to give it a shot at the admin's behest.
He removed his glasses, changed his clothes and talked faster in this way.
According to scholar,
John E Khalid's Eisenhower's admin had accomplished the first successful attempt
to sell a presidential candidate by employing the same techniques that sold soap
and toothpaste. Now, if you preferred a less made for TV candidate,
you might've fancied the hyper intellectual Adelai Stevenson.
He was called an egg head for being a smarty pants who talked fancy.
His beautiful rhetoric was of course irrelevant because he looked hella
uncomfortable on screen,
struggling with the teleprompter and flashing an awkward smile Stevenson,
losed appearing in political ads,
considering them too short to fully express his ideas.
And let's just say his performances didn't have that special possess.
Which the Eisenhower administration has been giving away.
He's been described as a 19th century style presidential candidate who unlike
his opponent refuse to be packaged or phony while Republicans spent somewhere
around $1 million on TV ads,
Democrats spent just 77,000 Stevenson ran against Eisenhower and
lost twice. Demonstrating that packaging. Your personality was now paramount.
The intimacy of television demanded that the candidate be personable showing
empathy and likability above all.
It's a little by the importance of TV friendly catch lines over any meaningful
engagement with the issues. And we're still feeling the effects today.
So to win the presidency, no you had to be palatable on television.
You see what's coming after all, what's more palatable than a celebrity.
Enter JFK on incredibly charismatic politician who spent five years
building a grassroots operation and giving speeches to gain popularity.
If Eisenhower was the first TV candidate,
Kennedy was the first candidate actually made for TV,
able to give short decisive answers with profound eloquence.
And he knew it packaging. His persona is that of the youthful vital,
compassionate, strong leader.
Kennedy had this thing in the bag as his father put it,
we're going to sell Jack like snowflakes.
It was Kennedy who would invite his opponent,
Richard Nixon to the first ever presidential debate,
taking place on millions of TV screens. It wasn't even a fair fight.
The youthful and aesthetically blessed spent weeks tanning and wore a bit of
stage makeup, which Nixon refused appearing pale,
nervous and sweaty in a suit that blended into the background.
There's more of radio listeners believed Nixon won and TV viewers believed
Kennedy had, but not really enough data to back it up. Still.
What we do know is that the debate was so decisive and boosting Kennedy's
campaign eventually to victory that no sitting president agreed to participate
in debates for another 16 years.
The presidency had now in many ways firmly become a bonafide popularity
contest. Once a candidate becomes a packaged personality,
it becomes very easy to become obsessed with anything that might tarnish that
packaging candidates began to see if they were likable enough with
hyper-specific polling data,
all rise of this data and the weakening of party power.
It's something specific to our politics as outlined by Sidney Blumenthal in his
1980 book, the permanent campaign starting with Lyndon Johnson,
Blumenthal explained, we saw the act of governance,
become a perpetual effort to get reelected with the combined use of political
strategy and image making as Blumenthal rights, permanent campaigning,
remakes government into an instrument designed to sustain an elected officials,
popularity. Essentially.
This meant the line between campaigning and governing sorted the disappear as
presidents made choices and conveyed messages.
Increasingly based on the reaction, it would incur from the American people.
According to scholar, Hugo heckler,
the strategy of permanent campaigning crystallized under Richard Nixon,
who employed unprecedented white house use of public opinion,
polling political consultants and comprehensive media strategies.
And like in pursuit of a second term, to those who hated him,
Hecla writes the man's whole political existence seemed a shabby and conniving
prominent campaign.
This arguably can be seen in his inconsistency on civil rights when courting
Northern black votes in 1960, he seem to generally committed to the cause.
Equal rights for all our citizens.
Why must we vigorously defend them first? Because it is right. And just.
According Southern white votes in 1972,
he was against laws that would further integrate schools.
I do not believe that busing to achieve racial balance is in the interest
of better education.
And by admission of his own campaign,
invoked racist anxieties with dog whistle rhetoric.
[Inaudible] that hurts you. It backfires.
So you say stuff like forced busing States' rights and all that stuff.
Permanent campaign and paramount importance of political celebrity continued
with literal Hollywood slash political celebrity.
Ronald Reagan's rise to power after easily beating incumbent.
Jimmy Carter Reagan did something unexpected.
He brought all of his campaigns best pollsters, media, masters,
and tacticians with him to the white house there,
they worked throughout his presidency using the same campaign techniques to
address and win the approval of the American people. As a 1981,
New York times article put it for the Reagan white house every night is election
night on television. Their obsessive strategizing was why.
According to the times,
Reagan had such stunning success in shaping public opinion. Of course,
with constant campaigning comes constant.
Image-making Reagan used his first term to cultivate his own mythology.
That meant endless strategic photo ops was showing him riding horses,
chopping wood, pumping iron like many a candidate before him.
The oldest president,
no doubt felt pressure to portray himself as a dude who does dude like things.
Well,
Reagan had previously run on a reasonably robust platform of reducing inflation
and taxes.
His 1984 campaign was according to a Republican strategist virtually issue list.
His ads pedal largely an image-based patriotism with Naria policy discussion to
be found. This is when that song I'm proud to be an American,
became something of an Anthem for 50% of the country and a terrible ear worm for
future generations. The phenomenon of the permanent campaign.
It can be traced in each subsequent presidency at the same time Hecla notes,
the politics of permanent campaigning and the media is consequent framing of
every day as a political battle,
that is to be won or lost prioritizes dramatic conflict over meaningful debate
about the issues over the next 30 years,
the permanent campaign became an ongoing quest to seem presidential AKA likable
and popular as candidates and presidents alike turned increasingly to
entertainment.
Venues like talk shows to establish their homespun like ability once elected.
They continued to reestablish that likeability over and over and over again.
How does it feel having a three inch vertical it's a three inch horizontal
George Bush took 416 trips frequently to swing States in his first three
years.
While bill Clinton even created a voter poll to decide where he should go on
vacation.
So the line between governing and campaigning continued to erode all the
while more and more money would continue to pour into the political game of
marketing charisma, particularly after the citizens United decision,
which allowed for limitless money to flood into elections at the same time as
the media increasingly focused on the most contentious aspects of politicking
rather than actual policy issues, negative ads about the other candidates,
personal suckiness dominated by 2012 only 14.3% of
ads were positive according to a university of Mississippi study,
which brings us to today when presidents must seem presidential,
but no one can seem to agree with that means while a shoeing,
many norms of running a campaign, Donald Trump is paradoxically.
The natural extension of years of increased obsession with presidential
personality.
The former apprentice star has spent years preoccupied with his own celebrity,
crafting an image as a shrewd businessmen unencumbered by any rules at the same
time,
democratic attacks of him center around how unpresidential his personality is.
And of course,
Trump is the embodiment of the permanent candidate filing his paperwork for
reelection.
The day he took office and continuing rallies throughout his tenure and a
pandemic. By this point,
we'd all become so used to the permanent campaign that took his extreme approach
to make anybody really notice something strange was going on after one more
campaign season that seems to stretch on for eternity and a series of debates
that could only be described generously as hell on earth.
We're left. Wondering if keeping up to date on campaign news is making us less,
rather than more informed,
maybe our fixation on the personality and personal proclivities of any
individual candidate. Hasn't just become an ain, but dangerous.
When we were obsessed with someone's likeability,
we can find ourselves lulled into supporting the most grotesque policies.
Political campaigning began in the first place because people wanted to know
where their candidates stood on the issues.
It's devolved to the point where candidate positions often feel more inscrutable
after watching them debate or in an ad or on a talk show as much reporting
as there is about the candidates and their presidential Ines.
It can feel like there's very little actually being taught or learned,
but who knows, maybe we're all becoming savvy to this.
Maybe there will be some magical backlash when people start speculating about
the 20, 24 election three weeks from now,
or maybe we can stop the weird personality worship of politicians.
One can only dream,
but what do you guys think is the American campaign cycle?
Just proof of how good we are a democracy or is it a literal scourge in our
nation and also raising my blood pressure for no reason.
Let us know what you think in the comments. Big,
thanks to our patrons for all your support slam that subscribe button,
like at your worst political enemy and as always, thanks for.
[Inaudible].